# CE-QUAL-W2 Workshop: Python and JupyterLab

The following instructions will guide you through though setting up Python and JupyterLab to run the workshop exercises, using the Anaconda distribution of Python. 

Python ([https://www.python.org](https://www.python.org)) is a high-level, interpreted, general-purpose programming language. Its design philosophy emphasizes code readability and maintainability. It uses a simple syntax and uses indentation to denote blocks of code, similar to indented paragraphs.

Anaconda is a distribution of the Python and R programming languages for scientific computing (data science, machine learning applications, large-scale data processing, predictive analytics, etc.). Anaconda was designed to simplify package management and deployment. The distribution includes data-science packages suitable for Windows, Linux, and macOS. It is developed and maintained by Anaconda, Inc., which was founded by Peter Wang and Travis Oliphant in 2012.

JupyterLab is a modern user interface and computing environment that allow you to edit and run Python code interactively. It also contains a number of useful features, such as a file browser and image and PDF viewer. JupyterLab is a product of the Jypyter project ([https://jupyter.org](https://jupyter.org)).  Jupyter's name is a reference to the three core programming languages supported by Jupyter, which are Julia, Python and R. It is also an homage to Galileo's notebooks recording the discovery of the moons of Jupiter.

The instructions will show you how to:

1. Install a custom library of software you will need for this workshop
2. Run JupyterLab

Generalized instructions for Windows, MacOS, Linux are located on the Anaconda website:

[https://conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/getting-started.html](https://conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/getting-started.html)

Once you have JupyterLab running, you will be able to open and run one of the provided "Jupyter Notebook" files.

#### 1. Open your Anaconda Prompt:

The Anaconda Prompt may also be referred to as a "terminal" or "command line". It will allow you to enter a series of commands, as shown below.

#### 2. Change to the directory containing the files we will be working with for workshop 2.11. This will ensure that everything you need for the workshop will be easy to access. You will first need to change directories within the Anaconda prompt.

* Type the letters `cd` in the Anaconda Prompt. This stands for "change directory".
* Enter one space using the spacebar on your keyboard.
* Go to your file browser (Windows Explorer) and browse to the folder that contains the files we will be using. For this example, the correct folder will be `DeGray_Reservoir`, which is located inside the `2.11_Workshop_Model_Utilities` folder.
* Drag and drop the `DeGray_Reservoir` folder to the Anaconda Prompt. Then press the Enter key.

```
cd C:\Users\MyName\Desktop\CE-QUAL-W2-main\workshop\Day2\2.11_Worskhop_Model_Utilities\DeGray_Reservoir
```

Verify that you have changed to the right directory in the Anaconda Prompt. Type `cd` and press the `Enter` key on your keyboard. This will display the full path to your folder.

```
cd
```

In your command prompt, you should see the full path to your folder displayed. For the example above, this would be:

```
cd C:\Users\MyName\Desktop\CE-QUAL-W2-main\workshop\Day2\2.11_Worskhop_Model_Utilities\DeGray_Reservoir
```

#### 3. Create a new virtual environment

The virtual environment is a sandbox that will contain only the software you want to use. Please type or copy-and-paste the following in the Anaconda Prompt:

```
conda create --name w2 python=3.9
```

#### 4. Activate the new environment

Enter the following:

```
conda activate w2
```

#### 5. Install the software libraries that are required for this workshop

Enter the following:

```
conda install -c conda-forge numpy scipy matplotlib seaborn pandas h5py yaml bokeh ipython openpyxl jupyter jupyterlab
```

#### 6. Set up Jupyter to use the new virtual environment, `w2`:

First, we need to install one more package. Enter the following:

```
conda install ipykernel
```

Then we need to tell Jupyter (i.e., the iPython "kernel") about this environment. Enter the following:

```
ipython kernel install --user --name w2
```

#### 7. Run JupyterLab

If the above steps have run without errors, you are now ready to run JupyterLab. Please enter the following:

```
jupyter lab
```

Note: "jupyter lab" is written as two words, and "jupyter" is spelled with a "y".

When JupyterLab launches, you are ready to open a notebook.
